- Bex, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
- Hello, Michael.
Thanks for having me.
- Hey, it's fantastic to have you here on the show.
Your article, 25 pandas functions that you didn't know
or probably don't know, I guess, as we'll see,
that really caught my attention.
Honestly, I don't know many of them,
so I learned a bunch by watching it.
You know, I do spend more time on the web side of Python
the data-based side of Python that I do on the data science, but certainly Pandas is
a super important part of Python these days. And honestly, the whole data science side
is the fastest growing part of Python.
Yes. Yes. Yeah. Pandas is like one of the first libraries that you will be introducing
any beginner Python, or in any beginner data science course. And it's amazing how much
it has grown since it was first launched.
And the funny thing about the article is that before writing it, I also didn't know most
of the functions.
I would always get annoyed by people who use some complex functions and I just wanted to
know how they worked and explain it to my audience.
So that was the idea of the article, both me and the audience learning.
- Yeah, that's the little bit of secret
behind these types of things, behind the tutorials,
behind articles, behind podcasts, and even behind courses.
Is a lot of times we dive into them
because we're like, oh, I really want to learn these things
and just let me, you know, put it in a format
I can present to the rest of the world
and help everyone else out, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
- Awesome.
Yeah, before we get into this,
I want to talk about your articles
and some Kaggle competitions
and then we'll dive into the 25 functions.
But let's start with your story.
How'd you get into programming in Python?
- Yeah, right after I finished high school,
I got interested in web development.
I learned some HTML and CSS,
and I was hoping to get things to be more exciting,
but after some time, I just got bored
because I'm really into math,
And web development had nothing to do with math,
so it was very boring.
So I switched to learning Python,
learned it for a while and discovered that data science
is mostly connected to math and statistics.
So I just bought a really good course
and that's how it started.
- Yeah, that's fantastic.
You know, I think people do often feel like
you have to be really good at math to be good at programming.
And honestly, most of programming
has very little to do with math.
- Yes, yes, of course.
- But data science does.
So data science is unique in this way.
I mean, I guess computational science, right?
If you're an astrophysicist, you do a lot of math as well.
But for most of us,
math is just a structured way of thinking
and we have structured programs
and that's kind of the end of the relationship there.
But for, if someone is out there and they really love math
and they wanna take it farther,
but they wanna do that in computers.
It sounds like recommending data science
might be the right path.
- Yeah, of course.
Yeah, it's how, it's very really beautiful
how software and math connect together in data science
and what kind of things it can achieve
like for neural networks and state-of-the-art
machine learning algorithms.
It's really amazing.
- Yeah.
It's one of these areas that's just growing so fast
and there's such big advancements.
You look at, I think back to when I was in college
and we talked about artificial intelligence and AI
and it was all about the Turing test.
Could you get a chat bot that would trick a human
into thinking that it was an actual other human?
And it never really seemed to come into reality.
It always seemed like, oh, it's kind of always 30 years out.
And then all of a sudden we have self-driving cars
and we have Google Co-Pilot.
And it's just the step jump
over the last couple of years has been amazing.
- Yeah, I was also amazed by Google Co-Pilot.
Like right after it was launched,
I wrote an article on it, like as a kind of intro
and it really took off.
Like so many people were interested in it.
Like it received like more than 50,000 views, the article.
- Yeah. - Yeah.
A lot of people were amazed by it.
- Absolutely, I'm amazed by it as well.
I think it is amazing.
It's also bringing to light some interesting,
almost legal and philosophical things, right?
If people put code on GitHub,
they didn't necessarily intend to train an AI with it.
If they put code on GitHub that's under GPL,
well, what the AI knows, is that now GPL
or is that completely, you know,
can that be used in closed source?
These are not known, right?
These are interesting questions.
Yeah, but I don't think we're gonna answer,
we're not gonna completely fill them out today.
Let's focus on something more, a little smaller.
So you mentioned your articles
and you've been doing a lot of writing.
So you're a top 10 writer in artificial intelligence on Medium.
Yeah, and you're also a Kaggle master.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, let's talk about those two things for a little bit.
Give us a sense of the stuff that you write about on Medium
and maybe some of your favorite articles
before we dive into this one.
- I started writing on Medium a year ago.
It was just purely for educational purposes.
I really liked how, like,
what the things you learn will be like,
will be locked into your brain by writing about them.
So it was a really amazing way to learn something new.
But as it, as my number of articles grew,
like my audience grew and I met a lot of people.
It opened a lot of doors for me writing.
And the most important of all,
I am more confident about my knowledge than ever before.
- That's fantastic.
I really like that you point out that it opened doors
because so many people feel like I'm not ready to write,
I'm not ready to speak at a user group or a conference,
or I'm not ready to appear on a podcast
or any of these sorts of ways
where you put yourself out there, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
- But when you do that,
the act of doing that pushes you to grow
and it also opens doors to people.
You know, if you're out there and you're genuine,
you don't have to be an absolute expert in everything.
You just have to be excited and interested
and other people who are excited want to talk to you
and work on something with you, right?
- Yes, yes.
You just have to be one step ahead of your audience
and that's it.
- Right.
- When you write articles.
- That's right.
- Yeah, I usually like, I really admire people
who do like do competitions on Kaggle for a while.
And I really had this like imposter syndrome.
I couldn't join the competitions
because I thought that they would be like,
"Oh, you're not gonna be able to do it."
And I was like, "No, I'm not gonna do it."
And then I was like, "Oh, I'm not gonna do it."
because I thought that they were too complex, that I had a lot of things to learn before I joined them.
I still do, but after I joined the tabular playground competitions, I learned that I can do it.
So I started posting my articles in the form of notebooks on Kaggle as well,
which started getting a lot of views and really nice comments from the audience.
And you know, the community on Kaggle is even more amazing than on Medium.
For an article that gets like read by thousands of people on Medium,
I usually receive like one or two comments.
But if you write, if you post the same article as a notebook on Kaggle,
like the audience loves it because Kaggle is mostly suited for this kind of tutorials.
And I usually receive like 30 or 40 comments.
And it's really amazing as a writer to be part of that kind of community.
Yeah, that's really amazing.
I had no idea.
I didn't realize you could post on Kaggle, but I guess you kind of post your
solutions and then have a conversation around them sort of, right?
Yes.
Okay.
Awesome.
People want to get started with Kaggle.
You know, what, what do they need to do?
Like maybe before we've dropped this topic, like if people haven't done
stuff with Kaggle yet, but they maybe want to use it to learn what's your advice there?
Yeah, right after you create an account, they have a whole suite of courses, free courses
you can take.
I think those are the very best, very good starting points for any beginner.
And also they have like two or three beginner level competitions, so you don't get intimidated
by those grandmasters or masters.
And they're just simple data sets you can work with, and you just have to submit your
predictions and just get a score, and nothing too complex.
And that's really the amazing part of Kaggle.
That's why those three competitions, I think they have like 100,000 people competing at
any single time in any time.
That's wild.
One of the challenges when you're learning
is finding a structured problem to approach, right?
In maybe in the web world,
people try to build things that are too ambitious.
They're like, oh, I want to build Airbnb.
You're like, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
You don't really hardly understand CSS.
Let's take it down a notch and let's go slow
and we'll get a right-sized problem for you to address.
Data science has the same problem,
but I think it has another aspect,
which is, and you need the data to start from, right?
And I feel like Kaggle helps in bringing
that kind of stuff over.
- Yeah, Kaggle has an amazing list of datasets.
I almost always use Kaggle datasets for my articles
because most of them are digestible
and small enough for people to get an advantage of.
- Yeah, awesome.
A question from the audience from Brandon Bennett asks,
are Kaggle competitions just machine learning
and artificial intelligence related or are there other types?
Yeah, Kaggle competitions are only AI or data science related.
Yeah, okay.
So, for example, the latest one launched on Kaggle, I think is about finding the cuteness
quotient of pets.
It was, yeah, yeah, you just, you just take in like thousands of images and you process
them with Python or R and the neural network learns the structure and learns the cuteness
quotient and just spits out a new quotient for any new image you get.
That's amazing.
So it used to be, here's a machine learning model that can answer, is it a cat or a dog?
And now it's giving you a cuteness score.
I can definitely see my daughter getting into data science with this one.
She's all about pets and cats and dogs.
And I personally want to put a vote out there
for the golden cocker, the golden retriever
mixed with the cocker spaniel.
Boy, those things are cute.
Okay, so that's Kaggle.
Sounds really great for learning.
And I suspect knowing something about pandas will pay off
in Kaggle and stuff, right?
Like it's such a foundational aspect.
- Yeah, pandas are used excessively.
- It is.
And I feel like pandas is one of those things
that you could learn it really quickly.
You could learn to do stuff with pandas in a day.
But then in a year,
you could still be learning stuff about pandas.
If you use it every day for a year, you know what I mean?
- Yes, yes, yes.
Yeah, most data science libraries are just very vast.
there are a lot of functionalities and most of the time,
like you can get around by learning like 10 or 15%
of all those functions.
But when you really need to get something like really rare
edge cases or unique cases, you really need to know
some of those rare functions that are buried
in the documentation, just so that you don't have
to reinvent the wheel.
- Yeah, in Python, we speak about Pythonic code.
There's code that we could write that might be code
that runs, but it looks like it comes from Java
or it looks like it comes from C
and somebody just got it working.
And I suspect you have the same thing in data science
and around pandas is like, yeah, you technically could do
this with pandas, but why don't you just call this function?
And probably the answer is, well, I didn't know
that function existed.
Of course I would have called it if I had known to do it,
but I just didn't know, right?
I'm new.
- Yeah, so hopefully we can shine a light
on some of those things that you can do.
I mean, for example,
not that we'll necessarily cover it in your article,
but if you're doing a for loop with a data frame,
you're probably doing it wrong, right?
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
The golden rule is to never use loops,
like teach loops completely.
- Yeah, that's pretty interesting.
It definitely takes a different way of thinking,
sort of set-based processing and passing in expressions
of lambdas to various places and whatnot.
- Yeah.
- Maps and whatnot.
Okay, we're gonna talk about some of those.
So let's dive in.
First of all, how'd you pick these 25?
Were these just 25 that you saw people use
and they were interesting?
And you're like, I didn't even know that existed
or what was your philosophy here?
- Yeah, for this kind of articles,
I usually go to the API reference of the documentation.
It just lists every single class and functionality
of some library, the API reference.
and I just read them one by one,
decide which one of those is gonna be beneficial to me
and possibly for my audience,
and I just pick them out one by one.
- Yeah, that's really cool.
I love to discover these types of things.
So why don't you kick it off with number one?
What's number one here?
- The first one is Excel Writer.
It's a class for writing to Excel sheets.
if you have multiple data frames,
you can write to Excel sheets as separate tabs
with separate sheets.
The pandas has usually,
the data frames have this to Excel function,
but if you give it the Excel write to instance,
it's gonna write it to a separate sheet.
It's gonna enable you to write to separate sheets.
- Yeah, this is super neat.
So in your example here,
which of course we'll link to the article
and people can check out,
they all have a bunch of code samples
under each one of these.
You've got two data frames, two pandas data frames,
and you wanna put them into some kind of Excel spreadsheet.
So you create one of these writers.
This is the function you're talking about.
And then you go to the data frame, you say to Excel,
and you give it the writer and a sheet name.
And you can do that for each data frame,
you give it different sheet names,
and it just piles up along the bottom, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
It's really neat.
- It's ridiculously simple, right?
It's like given the data frames, it's three lines of code.
- If you didn't know this.
- To create an Excel file and write it, yeah?
- Yeah, if you didn't know this,
you'd have to create two separate Excel files
and just add them together later manually,
which is not programmatic.
- Right, or maybe you say you don't know
that you can write to Excel.
I mean, I'm pretty sure I could write to CSV.
- Yeah.
- And there's multiple levels, right?
Like one level is like, I'm gonna write it line by line,
putting the commas in there myself.
Another one could be the right CSV, right?
Read CSV, write CSV.
But this one is like more structured, right?
And then you could possibly use some of the
more advanced tooling to do things like stylize
or highlight aspects of it or whatever, right?
Like pi open Excel or something like that.
Now for this one, you talk about,
it says that you need to have the right
supporting libraries there, right?
you for example, have to have different libraries.
I can't remember which one it was.
I think it was open pi.
- Open pi Excel.
Yeah, that's it right here.
- Yeah, yeah.
- I think it was in here.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Open pi Excel if you wanna work with XLS files.
And there's other ones as well, right?
- Otherwise you'll get an error.
- Yeah, right.
So basically Pandas delegates to this library
which actually understands Excel and writes to it.
- Yes, yes, yeah.
Another one, I think it was this one.
Here, is it this one?
Yeah, there's another one where it talks about
using FSSpec.
And this caught my attention as like,
oh wow, this is way more flexible
because I'm not sure people are aware of what FSSpec is.
Are you familiar with FSSpec?
- No, no.
- So FSSpec is this library
that allows you to treat different destinations
as Python file systems, like, you know,
with open some file name, instead of file name,
you can do all sorts of stuff.
So let me see if I can find some of the documentation here
of the things that it can go to.
Integrates with a bunch of different places,
but I'm not sure which one it goes to,
but it goes to places like S3 storage and FTP
and database and zip files
and all of these types of crazy things.
And even there's caching I guess is right.
So this Excel writer,
while it already sounds really interesting
because it writes to Excel,
like destination of these Excel files,
like this could be an Excel file in a database or something.
With basically hardly any changes to the code.
- Yes, yes.
- Yeah, that's super cool.
So good one to kick it off there.
A lot going on.
The next one is pipe, right?
- Yeah.
- Yeah, there's like a lumberjack looking dude
smoking pipe there, that's very cool.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, tell us about pipe.
- Yeah, so when you do data analysis,
like most of the time,
the data you'll be dealing with will be like not clean.
you have to perform some operations.
And Pype really offers a way to just package
all those operations into a single line of code
or into a single block of code.
It's kind of like a scalar and pipelines,
where you just have to run as only single line of code
and it just performs several operations at the same time.
It's really just a neat way to do data cleaning.
- Right, and it's what's called a fluent API.
So if I call data frame dot pipe,
what comes back is another data frame.
And then I could call dot pipe on it again
and then dot pipe and dot pipe and chain those together,
applying different operations and transformations.
It's almost like a MapReduce
or aggregation framework type of thing here, right?
It's pretty flexible, I would think.
- It's just like pandas in all its entirety.
like the amazing, one of the amazing features of pandas
like consistency, consistency, consistency.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I really like it.
It looks super neat.
So you need to do transformations on a data frame
with custom functions and get answers out.
Yeah.
Another thing that you pointed out here is that
as part of this, you know,
you could apply it to the whole data frame
or you could pass a set of columns.
- Yes.
So right as what you're piping across, what does that do?
That reduces the result to just those,
if you pass in three things, just those three columns.
- Yeah, these two functions remove outliers
and code categoricals are functions that accept arguments.
And when you pass it to pipe,
you just have to pass the function name,
which means you can pass the arguments.
So to pass the arguments, actually,
you just have to provide them after the comma.
So this remove outliers function
just accepts one argument as a list
and it performs like outlier removal
and just returns the whole data frame.
- I see.
So you can pass,
like your function might take the data frame
but it might also take additional information.
Like I want to exclude things that are over $100
and just throw them away.
Well, you gotta pass that 100 in
because it needs to know 100
versus some other cutoff value, right?
- Got it. - Yes, yes.
- Okay, cool.
And you say it resembles scikit-learn pipelines,
which is, yeah, that's pretty cool.
All right, we're up to number three, factorize.
- Yeah.
- Tell us about this one.
- In machine learning, as you know,
algorithms only accept numerical data,
and most real-world data sets contain categoricals,
which means like there are like a class one,
class two or class three,
and you have to encode them like to numeric,
like zero, one, two, three,
or using like one hundred encoder
or label encoder in scikit-learn,
but you can do that in pandas as well.
You just have to pass the column to factorize
and it just encodes them with numericals for each class.
- I see.
So let me see if I can give an audio friendly example
for listeners here.
If we've got something that says a data framework,
one of the pieces is what the weather was like,
sunny, rainy, sun, rain, snow, clouds, something like that.
You can't feed sun to the machine learning model.
You gotta give it a number, right?
So this will convert that to like zero for sun
and everywhere sun appeared, you would now have a zero,
one for rain, everywhere there was a rain and so on.
So it just does that, figures out how many different
categories there are, and then it gives them a number
that can be sent off to machine learning, right?
- Yes, yes.
You explained it there.
- Awesome.
See, I'm learning, right?
I'm just following along with you here.
Awesome.
Okay, that's a really cool one.
This next one seems a little bit crazy,
but it looks very useful.
Explode, right?
What is explode?
- Yes, yeah.
As you know, like survey data,
surveys usually contain questions
are multiple choice, you can just pick a lot of like more than one answer to one question
and that's recorded as one answer.
So you just going to end up with this kind of list in a single cell of the table.
Like a question, if you have a question one and the user just picks the answers A, B,
C, it's going to end up A, B, C is going to end up as a list in a single cell of a table.
Right.
For an example here, you have a series that has one
and then six and then seven.
And then the fourth element is a list
of three other numbers.
And you're like, wait a minute,
those are not supposed to just be multi-dimensional.
I want a straight series, right?
- Yes, yes.
You want a straight series.
And when you call explode on this series,
it's gonna just expand the series vertically
and just gonna fill up,
just takes the elements of the single cell lists
and just expands them vertically.
- Okay, yeah, these are the types of things
that you were talking about with loops, right?
Like it would be real easy to go through and say,
I'm gonna build up a new data frame
and if I see a list instead of a number,
I'm gonna just start appending those from the list
with an inner loop and then we'll carry on, right?
And here you've literally done it in one line.
- Yeah, yeah, this would be crazy complex
if you did it like manually.
- Right, and honestly slower, right?
Because a lot of this is probably implemented in C,
whereas you would be doing it at the Python layer.
- Yeah, yeah, it's gonna be very slow.
- All right, another question from Brandon out there,
glad he's here in the live stream.
How would I apply explode to the entire data frame?
I'm guessing he's thinking about maybe
if you had multiple columns
and they each potentially had this.
- I don't think that's possible.
- Yeah.
- I don't think pandas allows that.
- Yeah, okay, so it's gotta be on a series,
not on a data frame. - Yeah, all as equal.
- Right, got it, okay.
- Cool, so these are fun names that stand out.
- Yeah, very fun names, yeah.
- Yeah, and you pick some cool pictures, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
- All right, so what's the next one?
- Squeeze.
- Yeah, as you can see,
like there is some conditional operators
return like real, like data frames,
even it's a single cell,
like as you can see this from the subset set,
we are just asking the diamonds data frame
to return all diamonds that are priced below $1
and it just returns a single result, which is 326.
But it's returned as a data frame,
which is not comfortable to work with,
like a single cell data frame.
- Right, because Panda doesn't know ahead of time
that a .luck call is gonna result in a single item.
This happens a lot in databases too.
You do a query and the result is actually a single thing,
but the framework has no way to know
that the data is structured in a way that's unique
or that's a one thing.
And I suspect that's common here with data frames as well.
You're structured, like I know this is gonna give me
the one answer.
- Yeah, but it just reduces the whole table.
- Yeah, yeah, you're like,
"God, well now I gotta like dig in
and say, give me the first row, first column."
Yeah, okay.
So Squeeze helps fix this?
- Yeah, you just call this Squeeze on a single cell
data frame or series,
and just it removes all the dimensionality
and just returns the number.
- Interesting, that's cool.
What happens if I call it on one
that's got more than one item, do you know?
Does it just give you the first
or does it freak out and let you know?
- Yeah, I think I never tried that.
(laughs)
Yeah, I never tried that.
- Yeah, don't do that, right?
It's like, maybe if you just actually want the first answer,
maybe it's okay, but it also might give you an exception.
- You might be fine to try it now.
- Yeah, exactly.
Cool, so the next one has to do
with finding things in a range, right?
- Yeah, between, yeah.
Yeah, it's like, just the name suggests,
like you wanna take all the rows
that are in between some range.
For example, here in the code example,
I'm choosing all diamonds that are priced
between $3,500 and $3,700.
- Nice, so of course you could do this
probably as an expression.
- Yeah.
- You could definitely do this as a loop.
- Yeah, yeah.
- But both of those are slower, I'm sure,
'cause they're not implemented internally, right?
- Yeah, less elegant.
This one is better and faster and shorter.
- Yeah, one of the things,
the third parameter you can pass here to between,
in addition to like the lower bound and upper bound,
is whether or not it includes the endpoints, right?
- Yes, yes.
Yeah, this one is inclusive is neither,
So it's like a open set.
- Nice.
Another thing that I've seen here,
which is not one of your 25, but it looks nice.
I'm used to visualizing, quickly visualizing a data frame
when I get it back with head or tail.
And I wanna know like, okay,
kind of what did I get back here?
Show me the front, that'll be good.
Do a head or let's go to the end
and see what happened at the end.
But here you have dot sample.
That's interesting.
- Yeah, I usually, I use it often
because some data sets have like ordering,
for example, time series data sets.
And the first few rows might be not too representative
of the whole data frame.
So I just call sample with like five or 10 rows
and that randomly samples the data set
and usually sometimes that shows the,
that represents the data set better than head or tail.
- Right, exactly.
And so it just kind of randomly picks some stuff
throughout the dataset to show you what's going on, right?
For large datasets, that's really handy.
Nice to know.
So the next one has to do with, I'm guessing,
like when you're doing matrix multiplication and vectors
and like truly doing math,
most of the time I would expect this to show up.
- Yeah, most of the time, yes.
Yeah, transpose, yeah.
- Yeah.
- It's time for transpose.
I usually, you usually don't do math or metrics multiplication in pandas.
You'll do it in NumPy, but this one I use it mostly for when you, on the result of describe.
You see here, describe returns the axis inverted.
So the five number summary is given as rows.
And that's really a problem when you have multiple columns
because the dataset starts to expand horizontally,
which makes you scroll to the right,
which you don't want.
- Right, so when you do describe,
you get things like given a dataset,
it'll say, here's the count of this index,
the mean of this index,
or this value of a column,
standard deviation and so on.
And the number of options there is unbounded,
but the fact that it goes count mean standard deviation
minimum and then a few more things that's fixed
and that fits pretty well.
So you're saying if you transpose or like flip the rows
and columns so that you make it go vertical
instead of across, that's an easier way to look at it.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, I agree.
- Yeah.
- And it's as easy as saying dot T.
So it's not too hard to do, right?
You might as well.
- Yeah, it's an attribute, yeah.
- Yeah, cool.
All right, yeah, that's a really good one.
So you're saying if I'm gonna do
like some kind of matrix multiplication stuff,
I should not do it in pandas,
I should just stick to NumPy?
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
NumPy is like purely for mathematical purposes
and it's much faster than pandas.
- Yeah.
I suspect that NumPy has a good transpose as well, but.
- Yeah, yeah.
It has the same attribute.
- Interesting, okay.
Yeah, there's a lot of synergy between those two libraries.
So the next one has to do with styling things
and how they look, right?
One of the things that's cool about Pandas
is it mixes well with Jupyter Notebooks
and Jupyter Notebooks have a nice sort of explore the data
and let's see what's going on.
Let me just look at it, right?
So this styler thing, that style attribute
helps you with that, right?
- Yeah, here like it takes advantage of that,
the fact that Jupyter uses HTML and CSS under the hood.
So you can take advantage of that
and use some HTML and CSS knowledge
to style your data frame based on some
like I found it loops or conditionals.
Here, for example, after you take the transports
of the describe, you can just highlight the maximums
of each row or column using the highlight.max function.
Yeah, the pandas offers a lot of functions
after the style attribute.
you can just, you can use the built-in functions
or you can come up with some custom logic
to style your data frame using HTML and CSS.
- Okay.
Yeah, this is great.
So you can say, for example, here .style.highlight_max
and then you give it some CSS values
like color is dark red or something like that, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
So like, you just don't have to look at the raw numbers.
it just shows you the most important metrics
or the ones that you want.
It's really useful when you have like multiple columns,
you just don't wanna have to,
you just don't wanna look at all those crazy numbers
and you just use some.
- Yeah, like a real reasonable
or maybe straightforward thing you might start up
by doing this.
Well, let me just sort it.
We'll sort it so the highest one's at the top,
but in this example, you've got multiple columns
And the max of one column is in one value,
but it's a different row
for a different attribute of it, right?
And so sorting it is gonna do nothing
except for like, if you come up
with a whole bunch of variation,
then try to look at it and a little bit of color,
a little bit of picture goes a long ways.
- Yeah, yeah, visual.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah, the second example you have here in your article
is the one you wanna do, Ans.
This looks great.
Tell us about that.
- Yeah, this one is like background gradients.
So it just colors each cell of the column
based on its magnitude.
It's kind of like a few palettes,
like it's kind of like continuous palette.
It just shows where the maximum or the minimums are
and just how they compare to each other.
- Yeah, it's almost like if you could do a heat map
in an Excel table,
by making the cells different colors, right?
- You can pass in a color map and all sorts of stuff
to control how that looks.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, cool, I like it.
This is great.
You know, it's one of these things where, again,
one line of code and you can dramatically improve
the presentation value or the informational value
of what you're looking at, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
- Nice, all right.
I feel like that's similar to your number nine.
- Yeah, this one is Panasonic options.
like it's kind of settings of your phone.
You just set them globally and it applies
to all the data frames, series and all the functions
that you're gonna be using inside the project
or inside the session of Jupyter Notebook.
- Yeah, so if you wanna have some sort of
number of columns that are shown
or some kind of color or something like that,
you can just set that up at the beginning.
- Yeah, yeah, you just don't have to call them
every single time or change them every single time.
It's just a shorthand of way of doing things
like setting global settings.
- Yeah, you could probably even do something like
have a little JSON file that describes the look and feel
of what you're doing.
Just the first line, just load it up and set it
and then go from there, something to that effect, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, so you don't have to completely fill
the first few lines of your notebook with like setup code.
- Yeah, for example, one of those examples is like
display max rows.
If you set it to five and you just call the data frame,
it's gonna only show the first five rows.
So you don't have to call .hat every time.
- Oh, I see.
That's interesting, yeah.
'Cause of course, if there's enough rows,
it won't print the whole thing out, right?
Probably. - Yeah.
- Yeah, you don't wanna print 10 million rows
and completely lock up the system, yeah.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's gonna...
- Cool, oh, and another one that's kind of nice
is display precision.
And if you set that, you won't see the 1.27e to the five,
or whatever, right?
- Yeah, it's really annoying when you're working
with math functions.
It just keeps giving in scientific notation
when you just want to see the first
or fourth or fifth decimal places.
- Yeah, scientific notation is great
when you're dealing with huge numbers
are tremendously small numbers, right?
Like how many meters across is an atom?
Okay, so you're gonna need a E to something.
But for human beings, often,
you wanna just look at the number and go,
yeah, that's a million, not like 1.2 E to the six or seven,
whatever.
- Yeah, yeah, that's gonna be really annoying.
- That's cool.
And this is just one of those options you can set up
and it just globally applies to that notebook.
- Yeah, yeah.
- So another thing that's interesting about pandas
is the columns have types usually, but not always?
- Yeah.
Yeah, it's one of those like beginning level things
that you will encounter, but it can get really annoying
if the data types are incorrect for your column.
The most important one is the object data type.
- Right, that's like, I don't really know,
so we're just gonna store it.
- Yeah, yeah, I'm just gonna put it inside of an object
and objects are like, object data type is the worst one.
It also limits the functionality of pandas
and it's also the most memory consuming.
- Right, so the next function,
what number are we on here, number 10?
- 10, yes.
- In the hit list is convert_dtypes,
as in convert data types.
- Yeah, it just, when you call it on the whole data frame,
It just, it tries to infer the correct data type
for each column.
It's either, if it's a float or integer or string like that.
- Yeah, so your example, you're reading a CSV file
and some of the columns are detected correctly like floats,
but others get this object.
But after calling convertDtypes, it's like, you know what?
No, those are strings.
- Yeah, yeah.
But it can handle date times
because there are so many daytime formats
and pandas can't possibly know all of them.
- Why are date times so hard?
It really shouldn't be, but they really are.
It's crazy.
And then you throw in time zones and you'll forget it.
Okay.
And throw in daylight savings and all these other things.
- Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
That's crazy.
Yeah, daylight saving is crazy.
- Yeah, I suspect some of the Kaggle stuff,
part of the challenge is like,
normalize these dates because who knows
or something along those lines.
- Time zones are like total mess.
- Yeah, for sure.
So related to converting the data types is to select them.
Yeah, which is a way to filter what's in there.
Like you can filter by column or rows or even a condition,
but this is saying like, I only want the strings
or I only want the numbers, right?
- Yeah, while doing machine learning,
you have to apply certain pre-processing functions
to only a subsets of the data frame,
like only on categoricals or only numerics.
So this function will become very handy.
You just wanna, you just pass the data type
as a using NumPy, and it just gives all the subset
of the data frame with that data type.
- Nice, so you would say like data frame dot select
data types and then include equals NP number.
And now instantly the resulting data frame
is a subset that only has numbers, right?
- Yes.
- That's cool.
And then also you point out that you can do the reverse,
just like give you just the other,
like just the informational bits,
like categories and stuff.
- Categories.
- Yeah, yeah.
Cool, by saying exclude.
- Yeah.
- Very nice.
Okay, well, we just missed it with the Halloween here.
- Yeah, yeah, mask.
- But mask.
You know, you've got a cool picture of like a mask here,
but mask is number 12.
- 12.
- That's about it.
- Yeah, it's a conditional.
You can use it on series or data frames,
and it just returns the subset of the data
where some condition is true.
- Yeah, okay.
So yeah, in this example here,
you've got a bunch of ages.
- Yeah.
And I wanna take all those rows
that are beyond 60 or below 50
and convert those values to NAND.
- Got it.
Okay, so this is like an in-place update
or I guess it replaces,
creates another one that is like as if you updated it
and it finds all the stuff that's,
I guess, outside of your range
and it applies this other value, right?
Like if it's stuff that's outside of this range,
in this case, you're gonna set it to not a number,
but it could be set to zero or max or anything.
- Yeah.
- Cool.
All right.
A very good one.
Similar, I guess, is min and max.
And then some of these,
as we get a little farther down your recommendations,
I like them.
They're not just, oh, here, you can apply this function,
but apply it in this scenario or this context
get an interesting outcome, right?
So that's what number 13 is like.
Min and max along columns axis.
- Yeah, yeah.
So usually when you call min and max on a column,
it just returns the minimum or maximum of that column.
But sometimes you want it to row wise,
like it just treats rows as columns
and it gives min and max across the rows.
that's usually useful and a handy way of doing something that would take a lot of code if you're
done manually. Yeah, another one of these tricks that or techniques that lets you avoid looping,
right? Yeah, here I show a good example of like comparing four different libraries on five data
sets and you want the best performance on each data set so you have to find the best score across
the rows. Right, exactly. So the columns are the different libraries like XGBoost,
CatBoost, scikit-learn and so on being applied to the same data set. And you want to go for
row one, what one did the best? Row two, what one did the best? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Very nice.
Deep down manually. Yeah. Cool. All right. Number 14, n largest and n smallest. Yeah,
We're just talking about those max or minimums.
So, and largest, when you pass a number and a column name,
it just returns the data frame that contains the smallest
or largest and rows of that column.
- Nice, so if I were to call min or max,
that would give me the smallest
or the largest one respectively, right?
- Yes.
- But a really interesting or common question you might have
is like, what are the top 10 selling products this month?
Right?
And this lets you just say, enlarges 10,
and then you pick the column on which to judge it.
Here you have price, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
Five most expensive diamonds in the diamonds dataset.
- Yeah.
Yeah, again, one of these things that, you know,
no more looping or any of that stuff,
no more if statements, just call it, right?
- Yeah.
This one is like the five cheapest, most cheapest diamonds.
- Hmm.
- Yeah.
Yeah.
So in smallest, in largest, fantastic.
Also, sometimes when you're asking for a minimum
or maximum thing, you don't actually want the minimum
or maximum, you want to know where that is
'cause you're going to get that thing back
and say, I need that whole row
'cause I want to learn more information about it, right?
But if you said, well, what's the minimum price?
It's seven.
Like, oh, okay, great.
Now do I need to like loop through
until I find the thing that has seven in it, right?
Something like this.
So you've got a recommendation for that.
- Yeah, yeah.
The IDXMAN is IDXMIN.
This returns the index values of minimum or max
so that you can look at the row
that they are stored at or the column.
- Yeah, fantastic.
- Yeah.
- So here's the row that contains the minimum price.
I love it.
- Yeah.
- Really nice.
So many of these are really easy to apply, right?
Like it's not a lot of research to learn how to apply IDX MAX.
But at the same time--
or IDX MAX-- but at the same time, knowing that it exists,
now all of a sudden you can use it really easily.
But you probably wouldn't have known to look for it, right?
Yeah.
Cool.
You know, people often talk about differences
between beginner developers and expert developers.
And I think a lot of times beginners look at folks like you
who have a lot of experience,
they're like, oh, this guy is so incredibly smart
and he just has this way of solving these problems.
It's so amazing.
And to some degree, that's probably true.
But a lot of it is like just building up layers
and layers of these like, oh, I know I can use ID max,
IDX max, I know that I can use N largest.
And you just sort of pile them together
and then like, bam, like the solution becomes easier
'cause you have these little building blocks, right?
So it's, I think it's really valuable for people.
- Yeah, I usually think that the biggest difference
between a beginner level and a more experienced programmer
is just like, just how much time they spend
on the documentation, you know?
- Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, if you read the docs,
like if you patiently read the docs,
you're just gonna become really good user
of that particular tool or library.
- I agree, but there's just more,
you understand it better, you know more
of what it has to offer.
So it's like, it's less you've got to reinvent.
- Yeah. - All right.
This, I talked about how you have something
that may be well-known, but then applying it in a scenario.
And this number 16 is value counts with drop in a false.
What's this one about?
- Yeah.
Can you hear me?
- Yeah, sorry.
I think it cut out just for a second there.
So yeah, tell us about this number 16 one here.
- Yeah, when you have a series with like categoricals,
you just wanna see their proportions
or their numbers as a whole in the total series.
And that usually doesn't include the null values.
So you have to call is null and chain it with some
so that you learn the number of NADs in that column.
but you can do it efficiently with value counts
with setting, by setting drop NA to false,
which includes the proportions of the null values as well.
- Nice.
Yeah, so it just gives you basically a percentage
as a ratio here.
It's just a ratio of the number of the different categories
that have appeared here, right?
So very cool.
And now just not a number is included.
That's great.
- Yeah, then you can decide.
- Yeah.
- Cool, all right, number 17, clip.
This is a good one.
- Clip, yeah.
Yeah, clip is good.
- Yeah, for data that exceeds, I don't know,
maybe a range, maybe it's supposed,
some instrument's supposed to collect zero to 100
and it goes crazy and goes outside of 100.
- Yeah, for example, here we go back to the ages example
where I just wanna have ages between like 18 or 60,
18 and 60, and I want to exclude all those values.
And when you call clip with those custom values,
it just gonna impose those hard limits on the whole series.
- Right, so it'll replace the ones that are over
with the maximum that you set,
and the ones that are too low,
it'll bring them up to the minimum, right?
- Yeah.
- Very cool, again, against the whole data set, not looping.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, only one column at a time.
- Yeah, we talked about how difficult time is,
but you do have some recommendations for doing,
searching for data that appears at a certain time
or in a time range, right?
- Yeah. - What's number 18?
- Yeah, this one is like a subsetting
of rows of the data frame
at some particular time of the day,
like any time of the day, but you like, for example,
three o'clock, nine 30, 10 30, or any time that you want.
You're just going to take all those rows and return them.
We're using at time.
- Yeah. That's super easy, right?
Just pass it at time and you literally specify
- Yeah.
- Like 15 colon zero zero as a string.
- Like a real conversation or messaging.
- And then the other one, which is also interesting
between time, right? Like what happened in the morning, for example?
Yeah, yeah. Like what are those sales that happened in the morning or after midnight
or during some particular interval? This one is really handy to do that.
Yeah. So super easy. Just data frame dot between time or is that a series?
Yeah. No, no, no. It doesn't. It doesn't matter.
Okay.
It usually has to be, it has to have a daytime index.
That's it.
- Got it.
Yeah, okay.
So then just pass in strings like nine colon 45
to 12 colon zero zero.
And you know, that's like a late morning or something.
Beautiful.
The next one here has to do with time series.
Number 19.
- Yeah, yeah, again, time series.
- Date range.
Tell us about this.
- Well, this one is like, stands for business date range.
business date range.
So like pandas internally built in,
built into calendars, like it just,
when you wanna, how can I say?
When you wanna index the data frame you want,
time series data frame,
you wanna include only like working days.
Like you wanna exclude all the weekdays, weekends.
And you can do that for every single of the year,
for every single week of the year,
because you can possibly know which days are weekends.
So when you call the date range,
it just takes, it just indexes the data frame
using only weekdays.
And also it excludes the holidays, I think.
- Oh my gosh.
I was just wondering about holidays.
Like there's another wrinkle in there.
- Yeah, yeah.
- But already things like leap year and stuff like that
is built into this, I would imagine.
So this is super cool.
- Yeah, this is very important
for when you are doing time series forecasting
or analysis analysis,
because like, or working with stocks
because stocks are only traded on weekdays
and not on holidays.
So it will be very important.
- Or even if you do in like traffic analysis,
you wanna understand accidents
that are a result of rush hour, right?
You wouldn't wanna look on a weekend.
- Yeah.
All right, the next one has to do with correlation,
Auto-correlation.
Yeah, I don't do much with time series.
You're going to have to tell us about this one.
What's going on here?
Yeah, for example, this is usually how the autocorrelation of a series or time series
tells the predictability of the time series with itself.
Do you know about correlation coefficient?
Yeah, exactly.
it tells you how much the model matches the actual data.
Like it's 97% likely that the model will predict the stuff coming up.
It could be linear or more complicated, but that's something like that.
Yeah.
The gist of this is that if a time series has a high autocorrelation with itself,
it means you can predict it more easily.
Yeah.
It's how, basically how predictable or unpredictable is this thing?
There's a lot of details about autocorrelation
and it has very many applications in time series.
But the gist is that,
it shows you how much predictability it has
at each interval.
- Nice, cool.
It sounds very useful if you're doing that kind of stuff.
Number 21, hasNans.
- Yeah, it's also an attribute.
You just call it on a series
and it returns true or false.
If you have, it returns true
if you have at least one missing value in a series.
- Yeah, so there was this quote,
I remember who it's attributed to, sorry,
that says something to the effect of
like data cleanup and data wrangling
is not the dirty work, it is the work of data science.
Like to get everything ready
and then you just like hit it with the magic at the end,
right? - Yeah.
- And this feels like that lands right in that realm
is like given some data frame or series,
does it have not a numbers or is it all good?
- Yeah, yeah.
Missing values is like a huge problem in machine learning.
Most scikit-learn algorithms don't accept missing values.
So you either have to drop them
or impute them using some techniques.
And this one is very handy to detect those missing values.
- Right, I suspect this is the first test.
Like if it has not a numbers
and then we're gonna go do stuff.
But if it says false, then you're good to go, just roll.
- Yeah, yeah. - Go with that.
- But it usually turns true.
- Unfortunately.
Are you familiar with the missing no?
Let me...
- Yeah, yeah.
- This is another thing that sort of came to mind
is like this whole thing, this missing no package
as in like no numbers.
So a way to not just answer yes or no,
but to get visualizations.
Have you used this?
- Yeah, yeah.
I also wrote an article on it, I think.
- Okay, well, yeah, so definitely.
That's awesome.
Things like this sound really useful to me.
They seem like-
- Yeah, I really like that missingness matrix.
It just shows the reasons why missing values are correlated,
how missing values are correlated with other columns.
- Right.
Is it a whole bunch of missing data in one row?
- Yeah.
- And then it's all good?
Or is it interspersed?
Like this one's missing the birthday,
but that one's missing the name or something like that.
- Right, yeah.
- It's a really good package.
- Yeah, fantastic.
All right, at number 22, at and iat.
- Yeah, this one is like a faster versions
of lock and iloc.
It just enables you to index your data frame.
But this one is specifically designed
for retrieving single value conditionals.
- Nice, it's almost like an array index.
- Yeah. - A little bit.
What's the difference between at and iat?
- Using at, you can use like column labels,
like as you can see here, we are using cut and an index,
but iat, you have to know the index of that column.
- I see, so with at, it would be like row
and then column name, where iat is row and column number.
So it's probably less flexible.
You gotta know that cut is four
because it could be moved around
as people are creating or inserting data.
- Yeah. - Got it.
- Yeah. - Yeah.
- Nice.
Okay, agsort as in aggregation.
Yeah?
- Yeah. - No, argsort, sorry.
Misread argsort.
- Yeah.
This one just returns the indices
that would sort a data frame.
- Okay.
- Based on some column.
So during data analysis,
you sometimes want the indices,
not the actual sorted data,
so that you can use those indices in multiple times over.
- Got it, so you get the sorted,
say I wanna sort by the total bill,
but then give me the indexes as if it was sorted,
but don't actually change it.
So then you could go and then request data
off those indexes, got it.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Nice, all right, we're closing in on the end
and we've brought in the cat, the cat accessor.
- Cat accessor, yeah, I should have put an image here.
- Yeah, there would have been some kind of cool cat
put in there. Yeah, yeah, yeah. As you know, like pandas enables you to perform some like
data type specific functions like there is DT accessor for date time and also
and also str for strings and this one is for strictly for categorical purposes.
It has like a large suite of categorical functions that makes it easier to work on
categories, ordinals, or nominal data.
>> Okay. Yeah, fantastic.
Let's bring it to the 25th with group by nth.
>> Yeah. This one is less useful,
used in very rare edge cases.
When you group by some column,
possibly a categorical column,
you want to look at those rows or groups.
and calling nth on the grouped data frame
just returns that nth row of that groups, of each group.
- Got it, okay.
Yeah, that looks really cool.
- Yeah.
- All right, well, that's it for our list.
Hopefully people out there listening
have definitely learned something.
Now, your title was,
just to put a little disclaimer in here for everyone,
25 Panda functions you didn't know existed.
Pipe, key guarantee equals 0.8.
So you had this 80% likelihood.
I love it.
That's a little bit of a stats.
- Yeah, yeah.
No one complained about that, so I think that was right.
- Yeah.
It sounds about right.
It seems like there's a lot of neat use cases here
that people can find.
- Yeah.
- These are your 25 that you found interesting.
Other people might find them as well, but.
- Yeah, yeah.
you know, these are the kinds of, oh, so many, yeah.
- These are the types of things though
that people can say, all right,
today I'm gonna try to work with number one
as I'm doing my data analysis and stuff.
I just, I know I'm gonna be doing some Excel stuff.
So let's do the Excel writer one.
And then, you know, maybe later it's like,
oh, I know I'm doing survey type of data.
So let me work with explode and just try to, you know,
if you work these in one at a time,
eventually they become part of your tool chest.
and they're good, right?
- Yeah, yeah, and just expanding our tool set and skills.
- Yeah, I think so.
I think part of the trick is to make sure
that you apply it a little bit, right?
I mean, you know, they're out there,
but just as you use them, like bring them in.
- Yeah, it just saves you time and resources.
- Awesome.
Yeah, half the battle is just knowing that it exists, right?
It's not necessarily hard to use.
It's like, I just didn't know this was even an option.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, it's a real,
all of these are very easy to use.
You just know that they exist.
- Yeah, I feel like so much of Pandas is that way,
but they're so, it's hard to know
'cause there's so much to do there.
It's cool.
- Yeah.
- Out the live stream, Brandon,
just wanted, now we're kind of done,
I wanted to throw out, he said,
"Very helpful, thank you for the article, Bex."
That's cool. - Yeah, yeah, you're welcome.
- Yeah, I agree, yeah, thanks for doing this one.
I do wanna point out,
we certainly don't have time to cover it,
but let me pull it up here
so I can make sure it goes in the links as well.
You did the same thing for NumPy, right?
And you also were a little more,
I gotta say you're a little more confident here.
Your P of guarantee equals 0.85 instead of 0.8.
- Yeah, yeah, because NumPy functions
are a little bit harder to understand.
That's why most of them don't bother to learn those,
most people.
So I was a bit confident
because I also didn't know most of these functions.
That's why I was a bit more confident.
- Yeah, fantastic.
- All right, so if people like this flow
and they wanna kinda go a little deeper
and go into the NumPy layer, they can check that out.
They can also check out a bunch of your other writing.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Cool.
- (indistinct)
- Okay, right on for, that's getting great.
All right, anything else you wanna add to this article
before we call it good on that topic?
- No, no, I think we covered everything.
- Yeah, we covered it well, I think it was fun.
- Yeah, it was fun.
- All right, now before you get out of here,
There's the two questions you've got to answer.
If you're gonna write some Python code,
what editor do you use?
What are you gonna use?
- For data analysis, I usually use JupyterLab.
But if I have to do pure Python, that's always PyCharm.
I love it.
- Yeah, awesome, that's a good combo.
- Yeah.
- Then notable PyPI package.
Something, it doesn't have to be something super popular,
but something that you ran across
that people are like, you're like,
people should know about this.
This is something I learned about.
- Mm-hmm, yeah.
- Got it, one you want to suggest for us?
Any package?
- My favorite package?
- Yeah, yeah.
- So, well, I recently come across with UMAP.
- UMAP?
- Yeah, it's for dimensionality reduction, UMAP Python.
- Yeah.
- That's fun.
- Yeah, it's usually used for like very large datasets
to project them to 2D so that you can visualize them.
- Right, okay.
Awesome.
- Yeah, this one is a really useful package.
- Nice, so definitely people are trying to project down
to 2D.
I mean, that's one of the problems, right?
Is how do you look at some of this stuff that's,
How do you look at some of this stuff that's...
- Like 100 dimensional or 200 dimensions.
You just can't visualize.
- I don't even have any idea at all how to do 100 dimensions.
I remember we were doing some work with like complex analysis
and two dimensional, but each dimension was complex numbers.
So four dimensional, that was a challenge.
I have no idea how to approach 100.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
No one does.
That's why these kinds of dimensional
reduction techniques exist.
Yeah, fantastic.
And of course, important machine learning and stuff, right?
There's like dimensions that you can just throw away because they don't actually contribute to the predictions and stuff, right?
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, UMAP does that excellently.
Super.
All right, Bex.
Thank you for being here.
Final call to action.
People want to get deeper in Pandas, maybe learn more about some of your articles.
You know, what do you tell them?
Well, as I said, just first take the documentation.
You know, the documentation is usually,
it should be your first choice.
It's the best place to learn about a library.
- Awesome, yeah, it takes a little dedication,
but go through it and find out what it has to offer
and go from there, right?
- Yeah, it's a bit hard to read,
but documentation is always,
gives the best information about the library
because it's written by the package creators.
So they know their library the best.
- Yeah, for sure.
- Yeah.
- All right, well, thank you for being here.
Thanks for writing the article and sharing it with us.
- Thanks for having me.
- Yeah, you bet.
Bye.